---
layout: "../../components/shared/layouts/base/blog.astro"
title: "Comparing various API clients"
date: 2025-02-14T00:00:00.000Z
pubDate: 2025-02-14T00:00:00.000Z
author: "Yash Diniz"
description: "An overview of four popular API clients: Bruno, Postman, Hoppscotch, and HTTPie."
---

> Jump to [Choosing the Right Tool](#choosing-the-right-tool) if you do not want to be bored by the 
> analysis. Also, special thanks to [Step CI](https://github.com/stepci/awesome-api-clients) for 
> their awesome list of API clients.

## Introduction

Whether you're a developer, tester, or anyone involved in building modern software, you're working 
with APIs. [APIs (Application Programming Interfaces)](https://aws.amazon.com/what-is/api/#:~:text=on%20your%20phone.-,What%20does%20API%20stand%20for%3F,of%20service%20between%20two%20applications.) are the unseen backbone of every popular application 
we use daily. From apps on our smartphones to complex systems, APIs are everywhere. They’re the 
backstage bridges that connect everything, move information around and drive digital experiences.
As modern developers, we build them, test them and integrate them into various client (and server)
applications.

So, is there an easy way to try APIs that we’ve recently discovered, or even test APIs we’re 
currently developing? Yes! That’s where API clients come in. Think of them as your command centre
for APIs, an indispensable part of our API workflows. However, with the plethora of options
available, choosing the right tool for the job can be overwhelming.

In this blog post, we’re going to cut through the noise and compare four popular API clients: 
Bruno, Postman, Hoppscotch, and HTTPie. We’ll look at what each tool does, who they’re for, and why
you should care.

**Why should you care?** Because the right API client can make you more productive, reduce 
frustration, and ultimately save you a lot of time. Whether you need to collaborate with a team, 
prioritize security and privacy, work offline, or just care about optimizing your workflow, 
understanding your options is crucial. 

By the end, you should have a clear understanding of each tool’s advantages and disadvantages, 
enabling you to confidently choose what’s best for your project. Let’s break down the features, 
compare pros and cons, explore use cases, and finally guide you on choosing the best tool for your 
project needs.

## Postman: The de facto popular API client

[Postman](https://www.postman.com/) has been the industry standard for API development since a 
decade. It has an easy to moderate learning curve, has wide support for various API types (like 
REST, SOAP, GraphQL, gRPC), including real-time APIs (like WebSocket). Postman is serious about 
improving developer productivity and has a lot of features and tools that help throughout the API 
lifecycle: documentation, testing, mocking, monitoring and sharing.

### Features

- A friendly UI that helps in sending requests and inspecting responses.
- [Collections](https://learning.postman.com/docs/postman/collections/collections-overview/) that 
  help organise requests and documentation for better collaboration and reuse.
- **Postman Cloud** allows teams to collaborate and document APIs in workspaces. It also offers 
  centralised version control.
- [Documentation](https://learning.postman.com/docs/publishing-your-api/documenting-your-api/) tools
  for generating API documentation more easily.
- Support for **mocking** & **testing** APIs by creating [mock servers](https://learning.postman.com/docs/designing-and-developing-your-api/mocking-data/setting-up-mock/)
  on the cloud.
- JavaScript (node.js based runtime) for pre-request and test scripts.
- Support for [monitoring APIs](https://learning.postman.com/docs/monitoring-your-api/intro-monitors/)
  by setting up schedules and viewing monitoring results on the cloud.

Postman has a proprietary, centralized cloud-first platform designed for team collaboration, and 
supports workspaces to facilitate real-time sharing between team members. However, it’s a freemium 
model, and [comes at a cost](https://www.postman.com/pricing/). 
The free plan of Postman Cloud has a very limited feature set. To have the true team experience, 
you must upgrade to the Basic, Professional or Enterprise plans of Postman Cloud, which aren’t 
free, and pose privacy risks and vendor lock-in.

#### Pros

- Postman Cloud has Workspaces, a user-friendly team collaboration feature.
- Paid plans are enterprise-ready with extensive features, but free tier exists too.
- Filled with useful features, along with a lot of cloud-based features for collaboration and 
  monitoring.

#### Cons
- Using Postman Cloud could lead to vendor lock-in and might also not suit all teams.
- Free tier is very limited, and larger teams would prefer not picking Postman for its cost.
- Postman client is resource intensive, requires account creation for full features, and depending
  on settings, stores data on the cloud automatically (doesn’t run offline).

## Hoppscotch: The browser-based API client

[Hoppscotch](https://hoppscotch.com/) is the simplest web-based API client that runs as a PWA 
(Progressive Web App, so it can also run offline) in the browser. It’s not far behind when compared
to Postman in terms of features and experience. It supports various API types (like REST, SOAP,
GraphQL), including real-time APIs (like WebSocket, Server Sent Events, Socket.io & MQTT). They 
even recently released a desktop application of the API client, offering the same web-based 
experience on a [desktop app](https://docs.hoppscotch.io/documentation/getting-started/setup#desktop)
(built with [Tauri](https://tauri.app/))

### Features

- A friendly UI for sending requests and inspecting responses.
- Organises requests into **Collections** for better collaboration & reusability.
- **Environments** for storing and sharing environment variables with the team via the cloud.
- Real-time collaboration using **Hoppscotch Cloud** (supports [self-hosting](https://docs.hoppscotch.io/documentation/self-host/getting-started)),
  with team workspaces for sharing collections and environments.
- Vanilla JavaScript for composing simple pre-request and test scripts.
- Experimental [AI features](https://docs.hoppscotch.io/documentation/features/ai-features#enable-ai-powered-features)
  for generating test scripts, request bodies, and API request titles.
- **Migration** supports importing and exporting Postman & cURL files.

Just like Postman, Hoppscotch also has a [freemium pricing model](https://hoppscotch.com/pricing),
with an optional centralised cloud-first platform; however it also supports easy [self-hosting](https://docs.hoppscotch.io/documentation/self-host/getting-started) 
using Docker. If you do not opt-in for the cloud platform, data gets stored offline, in browser 
local storage. This of course poses privacy risks and potential data loss.

#### Pros

- Good for teams working together directly, with real-time collaboration and easy sharing.
- Hoppscotch is browser-based, very accessible and lightweight.
- It’s also completely free and open source, with optional paid plans for extra features.
- Having a cloud account is optional. Hoppscotch can be used without cloud for basic features.

#### Cons

- Cloud-based collaboration is not very seamless, less mature than Postman.
- Larger teams might prefer picking optional paid plans for enhanced features.
- Browser-based nature of Hoppscotch might be self-limiting in advanced desktop workflows.
- Compared to fully offline tools, the browser-based nature also raises privacy concerns.

## HTTPie: The CLI-based API client

[HTTPie](https://httpie.io/)  is a simple yet powerful CLI-based API client. While no CLI API 
client tool can beat cURL (having been at it since 1998) with respect to its extensive 
functionality, HTTPie mainly focuses on providing a developer-friendly command-line experience for 
making HTTP requests. It only supports HTTP (and by extension, REST) and no other API types. It’s 
designed for simplicity and readability in the terminal and doesn’t need any online connectivity. 
It’s primarily for individual use and shell scripting, with no built-in cloud or collaboration 
system. Collaboration usually involves the sharing of scripts or commands (via your favourite 
collaboration system).

### Features

- Completely CLI-based operations. This makes it easy to integrate into shell scripting and automation situations.
- Using shell scripts allows for a highly extensible testing and scripting experience. 
- No cloud or git integrations, so commands are only stored while writing them into a script file. By default, responses are not stored, data stays local and never leaves the device.
- Intuitive command-line experience for constructing HTTP requests in the terminal.
- Colorized and formatted output for easy readability.
- Session persistence for handling cookies and other authentication.

While HTTPie CLI is free and open source, it also offers a paid tier for businesses, with GUI and 
team collaboration features, diverging from the core CLI philosophy.

#### Pros

- Excellent for scripting and automation, sharing commands is as easy as sharing a shell script.
- Completely free and open source, and HTTPie for business is available with GUI.
- Extremely lightweight and fast, optimized for CLI workflows.

#### Cons

- No built-in team features, collaboration relies heavily on external tools and scripts.
- CLI-only, HTTPie is not suitable for users preferring a GUI.
- HTTPie for business is paid and deviates completely from the core CLI philosophy.

## Bruno: The modern open-source API client

[Bruno](https://www.usebruno.com/) attempts to disrupt the status quo with a powerful 
[manifesto](https://docs.usebruno.com/introduction/manifesto), and a team that's trying to tackle
the exact pain points that make Postman & Hoppscotch hard to work with: vendor lock-in, bloatware,
and proprietary cloud-based platforms. Bruno claims to be a developer-first and extensible platform,
where 'platform' features are non-goals. It is offline-first (yes!), where data isn't automatically
synced to any cloud, and it has native git integration, which simplifies collaboration between
developers (since most developers are already familiar with git as a distributed version control
and collaboration tool).

### Features

Of course, the real picture of Bruno is that it's still catching up. Its only major drawback is that
it just supports HTTP (REST) and GraphQL, with no support for real-time APIs yet.

- A friendly UI for sending requests and inspecting responses.
- **Collections** are first-class citizens, that help organise requests and documentation for 
  better collaboration and reuse. Requests and documentation are stored as files in 
  [Bru Markup](https://docs.usebruno.com/bru-lang/overview), and collections map the folder 
  structure of the project.
- **Offline-first**, no file is automatically synced to any cloud, and 
  [native git integration](https://docs.usebruno.com/git-integration/overview) allows developers to
  collaborate via [git](https://git-scm.com/), a distributed version control system.
- [Scripting](https://docs.usebruno.com/testing/script/getting-started) support in JavaScript, for
  [testing](https://docs.usebruno.com/testing/tests/introduction) and **dynamic requests**.
- [Secrets management](https://docs.usebruno.com/secrets-management/overview) with environment 
  variables within the API client.

The killer feature of course is the git-based collaboration, since this enables 
[GitOps](https://about.gitlab.com/topics/gitops/) for API collections, which means each git branch
can have different versions, and these can be merged, or even reviewed via PRs (Pull Requests). 
Bruno is also completely free & open source. 

#### Pros

- Native git integration is familiar to developers, making version control and collaboration very easy.
- Being free & open source makes it ideal for individual developers and open-source projects.
- Bruno is offline-first, while also being lightweight, fast and responsive. It’s focus on privacy is unparalleled.

#### Cons

- Native git integration gives non-git users a steeper learning curve, and a moderately difficult experience when collaborating.
- Community support provided, with no paid support plans available.
- Community and ecosystem around Bruno are still growing, since it’s an emergent tool.
- Being offline-first, Bruno doesn’t have any cloud-based features.

## Choosing the Right Tool

Choose Bruno if: 
- Your team heavily relies on Git for version control.
- You prefer open-source and free tools.
- Offline functionality and data privacy are priorities.
- You want a lightweight and fast API client with GitOps workflow for API collections.

Choose Postman if: 
- Your team needs a comprehensive API platform with extensive features across the API lifecycle.
- Cloud-based collaboration and API lifecycle management are essential.
- You require advanced testing, documentation, mocking, and monitoring capabilities.
- You are comfortable with a freemium model and a cloud-centric approach.

Choose Hoppscotch if: 
- You need a simple, web-based API client accessible from any browser.
- Real-time collaboration and ease of sharing are important.
- You prefer open-source and free tools with optional cloud features.
- Quick API testing and exploration are primary use cases.

Choose HTTPie (CLI) if: 
- You are comfortable with the command line and prefer CLI-based workflows.
- Scripting, automation, and quick ad-hoc requests from the terminal are common tasks.
- Simplicity and readability in the terminal are prioritized.
- GUI is not a requirement, and you prefer a lightweight, fast, and efficient tool for 
  terminal-based API interaction.

## Migration Considerations

### Bruno & Hoppscotch support Postman collection import
Both Bruno & Hoppscotch make it relatively easy to import Postman collections. It also supports 
importing environment variables in most cases.

### Consider Bru lang for Bruno manual optimisation
Bruno uses Bru, a human readable, plain text markup language that’s git friendly too. This allows
us to optimize collections for Bruno’s Git-based workflows if migrating to Bruno.

### HTTPie is a different paradigm
Migration to HTTPie from GUI clients means adopting a CLI-based workflow. This could be 
counter-productive in most situations and potentially require major rewrites.

## Conclusion

Developers use API clients to boost productivity, and help us search, test and debug new APIs. 
Postman holds up as the all-rounder, feature-rich and built for team collaboration over the cloud. 
Bruno on the other hand offers a refreshing git-centric approach, valuing offline work and data 
privacy. Hoppscotch is perfect for quick API testing as it’s accessible over the browser. 
HTTPie is perfect for automation experts, CLI enthusiasts, and those who prioritize speed and 
shell scripting.

With the variety of APIs and technologies, the API client landscape is widely assorted, with each 
tool supporting various needs. The tool you pick depends heavily on specific team needs and 
workflow preferences. Consider factors like collaboration style, budget, API types, privacy needs, 
and CLI vs. GUI preference.
